$XFree86: xc/programs/xedit/lisp/README,v 1.5 2001/10/18 03:15:21 paulo Exp $

LAST UPDATED:	$Date: 2002/01/19 15:16:01 $


    SUMMARY

  This is a small lisp interpreter for xedit. In the current implementation,
it is just reading from stdin and writing to stdout/stderr. The code in xedit
just wraps these and read/write from a pipe to the lisp interpreter. This
is expected to change at some time, so that it should be possible to manage
the xedit text buffers from lisp code.

  It has a very simple method for loading shared modules, slightly based on
the XFree86 loader code, that is currently disabled by default. To enable it,
edit lisp.cf and change BuildSharedLispModules to YES.

  Assuming you have built it with BuildSharedLispModules enabled, you can build
a small test application can be built in this directory running "make lsp".
Two lisp programs are available in the test directory. To test the programs
run "./lsp hello.lsp" or "./lsp widgets.lsp".

  Currently, it should be used as an helper and/or a small calculator embeded
in xedit. For the future it should be possible to write entire interfaces
in the xedit text buffers. The code is expected to be very stable, and by
using it, xedit should not crash in any way (actually, it can't, as the
lisp is running in a separate process). The lisp process is started once the
first eval is called.


    USAGE SUMMARY

  To evaluate lisp expressions, put the text cursor just after the
lisp expression and press:
C-x,C-e	- will evaluate it, and print the result to the message window
C-j	- will evaluate it, and print the result to the edit window, any
	  errors are printed to the message window.
C-g	- will send an SIGINT to the lisp process, and that process will
	  stop whatever it was processing and jump to the toplevel,
	  to wait for more input.

Note that C-j currently will only work in the *scratch* buffer.


    IMPLEMENTATION SUMMARY

  The interpreter is expected to be a subset of Common Lisp, and is not
expected to invent any new features or interfaces, just become more and
more compatible with Common Lisp. The only non Common Lisp features, currently
is/are:

  o It has some Emacs Lisp functions, that should be removed and replaced with
    the Common Lisp equivalent ones.


  The currently implemented function names are in table.gperf. There are also
functions in modules/fun.lsp, that are inplicitly loaded by xedit and the
sample program lsp.


    BUGS

  If (print) is called with a circular list as argument, the lisp interpreter
will crash. A code for circular list detection was written, but removed as
it was buggy.
  The (gc) code was slightly changed to avoid circular lists, but the code
is not correct, so (gc) may need to be called several times to get deep enough
on some more complex data structures, and free it. But calling (gc) explicitly
is not required, as it will be called every time there are not enough available
cells.


    WHY?

  I have used Emacs for a long time, and since I was working as volunteer to
make of Xaw a better user interface, xedit seemed to need some work. For at
least 3 years now, I don't use any other text editor than xedit, unless I
need for some reason to work on the text console (like when debugging the
xserver or xfs).

  The lisp code was mostly written for some years, but not incorporated in
xedit. Since the Lisp language is unlikely to change from day to night, it
can be safely incorporated in xedit. Contrarily to this is an html
viewer/editor to xedit I have been writing for some years. I wish I could add
it to Xaw/xedit soon, but unfortunately it is still unstable, and not
functional.


    NOTE

  The lisp interpreter is mean't to be usable without xedit and without Xaw.
The xedit text buffer interface, when done will be just a module.
  If you want to test the current implementation, subject to changes, as it
is only for testing, create a file named "xedit.lsp", with the contents:
--
;; (provide "xedit")

(defun point ()
    (format t "get-point~%")
    (read)	;; current point
)

(defun point-min ()
    (format t "point-min~%")
    (read)	;; minimal point value
)

(defun point-max ()
    (format t "point-max~%")
    (read)	;; maximal point value
)

(defun goto-char (point)
    (format t "set-point ~D~%" point)
    (read)	;; nil return value
    point
)

(defun insert (str)
    (format t "insert ~S~%" str)
    (read)	;; nil return value
)

(defun get-background-color ()
    (format t "get-background~%")
    (read)	;; current background color
)

(defun set-background-color (color)
    (format t "set-background ~S~%" color)
    (read)	;; nil return value
)

(defun get-font ()
    (format t "get-font~%")
    (read)	;; current font
)

(defun set-font (font)
    (format t "set-font ~S~%" font)
    (read)	;; nil return value
)

(defun get-foreground-color ()
    (format t "get-foreground~%")
    (read)	;; current foreground color
)

(defun set-foreground-color (color)
    (format t "set-foreground ~S~%" color)
    (read)	;; nil return value
)

(defun other-buffer ()
    (format t "get-other-buffer~%")
    (read)	;; value of other buffer
)
--
Note that it is printing a literal ESC.
  After creating the file xedit.lsp, at the *scratch* buffer, type
(load "xedit.lsp") and press Ctrl+J. After that, you should be able to use
the defined functions. Try this:
(set-background-color "PeachPuff")
(set-foreground-color "Red3")
(goto-char (point-min))


    DEBUGGER

  There is a, currently, very simple debugger implement in the interpreter.
To use the debugger, run the lsp sample program as "./lsp -d", and optionally
pass a second parameter, for the file to be interpreted. Once the debugger
prompt is visible, type "help" for a summary of options. To leave the debugger
type "continue".
  Note that the debugger is still very simple, it won't work from xedit, and
won't drop to the debugger on "fatal errors". It allows adding breakpoints to
functions and watchpoints to variables. Support for changing data and going to
the debugger on fatal errors should be added soon.


    STRUCTURE IMPLEMENTATION OVERVIEW

    Assuming structure person is created as:
	(defstruct person age first-name last-name)
    The interpreter will gc protect the arguments in the list DEF defined as
	(person age first-name last-name), and create the special atoms:
	make-person	  with structure property DEF function STRUCT_CONSTRUCTOR
	person-p	  with structure property DEF function STRUCT_CHECK
	person-age	  with structure property DEF function 0
	person-first-name with structure property DEF function 1
	person-last-name  with structure property DEF function 2
    When an accessor function is called, as in:
	(person-age (make-person :age 30))
    The evaluator will internally translate the code to:
	(xedit::struct-access 'person-age (xedit::make-struct 'make-person :age 30))
    The function xedit::struct-access will fetch the structure property
from the atom person-age to determine the offset, and also make sure it's
argument is of type person. The function xedit::make-struct only checks that
the structure property is set to the atom person, and that the age field is
a person field name.
    It is possible to override the setf method for structures, but a suitable
one is constructed, for example:
	(setf (person-first-name some-person) 'MARIA)
    Internally, it will be evaluated as this definition where provided:
	(defsetf person-first-name (struct) (value)
	    `(xedit::struct-store 'person-first-name ,struct ,value))
    And the code executed is:
	(xedit::struct-store 'person-first-name some-person 'MARIA)
    Type checking is also done with a single function, as the code:
	(person-p some-person)
    Is internally translated to:
	(xedit::struct-type 'person-p some-person)
    The current structure implementation, like almost everything in the
interpreter is very simple, and calling any of the xedit::* functions
explicitly is unsupported.
    Structure redefinition is supported, but not encouraged, and you should
do it only when sure no instances of the previous definition exists, previous
access method functions are only removed if the new definition has a field
with the same name, and calling the new methods on old objects will generate
errors.


    HELPING

  Send comments and code to me (paulo@XFree86.Org) or to the XFree86
mailing/patch lists.

--
Paulo
